Because security risk management relies heavily on mathematical principles,
we can end up with abstract assessments of risk.
Security risk often becomes a function of whether the likelihood in impact are critical,
high, medium, or low.
Meaning that risks can become a matter of experience and bias.
In mathematical formulas, there can be variables that transform
risk expression from a highly positive outlook to a highly negative one.
But those models are adjusted over time and
measured for effectiveness against real outcomes.
Here, we're dealing with a much less refined assessment mechanism.
What this means is that our formula;
risk equals likelihood times impact,
is not really meant to be a mathematical equation.
We use it just to express a measure of risk.
We're not actually multiplying anything.
Here's an example of a risk: a disgruntled employee publishes
your organization's entire customer contact list to an online blog.
What's the likelihood of that occurring?
Well, I'm not sure;
could we build a formula for starting to measure
mathematically what that impact might look like?
Sure. We could say that the likelihood is a function of
employee dissatisfaction times opportunity minus mitigating controls;
maybe there are other factors.
But how practical is it to build a formula and gather
inputs for every potential security risk,
and how much do we really know about things like measuring employee satisfaction?
Probably not a lot.
So instead, we perform rough calculations about
likelihood based on experience and unique circumstances.
So maybe the risk here we decide is medium.
Well, what about the impact?
The same is true for impact.
We could envision a formula for measuring the value of
an exploited risk or impact and it might look something like this.
But how much do we know about the value of customer records
or the value of an average customer contract or reputational damage?
Sometimes it's difficult to find that information out.
So let's call this medium as well.
So in general, we're making a value judgment based on
our experience and that by itself can present some risk.
We'll actually allow our own experience and
our own risk appetite to color our view of risk.
Let's look at another example.
A phishing attempt successfully exploits a user
and contaminates several workstations and servers with ransomware.
What's the likelihood of that?
What's the impact? Again, I'm not sure.
Let me give you some additional context.
What if I told you that phishing is the most widely used attack vector by a large margin?
Does that change your opinion or does that color your opinion?
Well, what if I said that we do anti-phishing training one time a year?
Does that change the likelihood of occurrence?
Would it change the impact?
What if I said that a company that you previously worked for got phished
a single time but that resulted in ransomware being
placed on every computer and caused the company to go bankrupt?
Does that mean that in your mind,
this phishing example is critical?